# Observability in Software Engineering

Software engineering has grown immeasurably more complex in the past decade. From expanded legal requirements to the ongoing need to innovate and continuously improve their products, software companies face an increase in the amount as well as complexity of the code that they produce and maintain.

However, with every line of code comes the potential for bugs, errors and crashes that threaten the stability of the business. A single line of wrongly written code may take down the company's website, delete the database or expose private customer data to the public. 

Largest software outages cause financial impacts in the billions of dollars (CrowdSTRIKE) and software errors can ruin a company in under an hour (Knight Capital). For this reason, it is of vital importance that a company invests well in it's deployment processes, as well as monitoring and observability.

The practical part of this thesis will create an application that allows processing logs from different formats (DMARC, Reporting API) into the rsyslog format. This allows for multiple applications to output their metrics and logs into one single format, which allows for centralization of the business's observability.

The aim of this work is to focus on the business impact of the observability and the advantages it can provide to modern software businesses. Even small improvements in monitoring can allow exceedingly high savings with an early detection and mitigation of software problems.








Sources: (Cite with APA)
CROWDSTRIKE: https://dougseven.com/2014/04/17/knightmare-a-devops-cautionary-tale/
KnightCapital: https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/crowdstrike-cost-fortune-500-losses-cyber-insurance/722396/