Monitoring is the process of gathering application front-end or back-end measurement data to diagnose, prevent or recover from application errors. (Tamburri, 2020) During this process, the application itself or programs associated with the application observe, collect and send data that describes how the application is running.

<<<<<<< HEAD
This monitoring can include everything from logs of unrecoverable catastrophic errors to day-to-day ordinary traces that detail regular code execution. As such, logs are usually assigned severity levels. In the mostly commonly used scheme, the severity

Traces or logs are pieces of text that detail the current state of the system, such as the current working state of the application - values of variables, thread count and load currently placed upon the application.
=======
Traces or logs are short text messages that detail the current state of the system, such as the current working state of the application - values of variables, thread count and load currently placed upon the application. These pieces of text are generated automatically by a software application and are usually sent to a centralised place, available for all developers to display and analyze. Many legislatures, especially in the European Union, require the retention of logs for a prolonged period of time and a high priority should be placed on the integrity and safe-keeping of these traces.

Logs can include everything from reports of unrecoverable catastrophic errors to day-to-day ordinary traces that detail regular code execution. To ease the navigation and differentiation of these reports, logs are usually assigned severity levels. In the most commonly used scheme, the severity levels are:

1. Fatal - critical problems leading to a complete shutdown of the application
2. Error - partial shutdown of an application or one of its components
3. Warn - potentially harmful situation (disk space running low)
4. Info - important but normal events describing the application's process

Other levels might include
- Trace
- Critical
- Verbose
- Notice
- Alert
- Panic
- Failure

Though the use of these levels is application-specific and the differences between levels, such as Notice vs. Info, are unclear and the borders between them often blurry. It is often up to the software development teams themselves to decide what severity levels are useful for them. 
>>>>>>> 94cf2cb (Hourly snapshot: 16:52 26/03/02)

These traces can often be critical in the diagnostics after a system failure - why did the application crash and under what circumstances? Such crashes can be catastrophic for business - an e-shop may lose hundreds of thousands in revenue for every minute it is offline and unavailable to its customers. As such, it is essential to get the business up and running as soon as possible, which requires the developer to figure out what is wrong with the current system and how to fix it. For this diagnostic, logs are irreplaceable and very often offer the first clues for the fix.

<<<<<<< HEAD
Monitoring also allows the business to notice anything has gone wrong. As detailed in chapter 1.2.2 Knight Capital, a company can lose half a billion dollars in an hour because of a rudimentary bug. To prevent such a catastrophic loss, it is necessary for companies to have proper alert systems in place.
=======
Monitoring also allows for the business to notice anything has gone wrong. As detailed in chapter 1.2.2 Knight Capital, a company can lose half a billion dollars in an hour because of a bug. To prevent such a catastrophic loss, it is necessary to have a proper alert systems in place. The developers are automatically paged or sent a message as soon as the system starts reporting anomalous values - too many trades executed in a short span of time, hardware running loads too high, as well as the opposite problems - servers stop responding, website is unreachable. All of these are very likely signs of a software or hardware failure that must be solved as soon as possible.

A developer assigned the responsibility for the application might be woken up in the middle of the night by a pager in case of a Fatal or Error logs, but a Warn log might only be sent to his email to be discussed during working hours. 
>>>>>>> 94cf2cb (Hourly snapshot: 16:52 26/03/02)

The developers responsible for keeping the software up and running are automatically paged or sent a message as soon as the system starts reporting anomalous values. An example of problems a software application might face when running:

·         Critical errors stop code execution
·         Output values are not as expected
·         Load placed on the infrastructure is too high
·         Servers stop responding
·         Website is unreachable